# The Stair is Like: Observe, Review, Analysis, Build, Research, Consulting

I already monitor and observe for 3 years from early 2023 that I've still 15th y.o 'til this year 2026 in my 18th y.o. I want to step up this year, I started to learn how to write a review and opinion. And I don't wanna three years again, three months minimum and this semester maximum, I want to step up from writing thing to analyzing thing.

I will believe my review writing is approved to be step up if an expert noticed me and give me positive response. That's validation for step the next stair I guess.

I'm in 3 years of observe, but I never sure I see it right 'til this day. Since I got my 15th birthday candle, I think about everything I see, I contemplating eveyday. But still never sure.

Actually yesterday, I got praised by expert because my questions about tech startup ecosystem in Indonesia and how I manage to launch my startup in Bioinformatics ESG analysis and consulting. You can see my full story on my posted LinkedIn.

He encouraged me to always keep learning. And that's how I feel good enough for graduation from observation step.

Observe for 3 years is wild, what I have learn?
- 2023 I learn that Sociology is the way I understand the society, and I knew Social Engineering terms in that year.
- 2024 I learn Economy is the way I understand the money, and I knew (C.R.E.A.M) Cash Ruled Everything Around Me.
- 2025 I learn Biology is the way I understand human body, and environmental scene from the bigger picture of my generation right now.

**2026 I learn to write.**